---
layout: post
title: 5 in 5 (2)
---



## 5 in 5 – 2

I wanted to explore one of the events from the timeline in greater detail. I felt the Machinists were an interesting group to find out more about. The Machinists formed as a response to the changing landscape of technology and the rise of Closed Cycle Computing (CCC). A group with extreme views, they released a manifesto just after the announcement of the CCC standard. 



Here is the manifesto:



#### Machinist Manifesto

Since the beginnings of time, humans have used their creations to establish their species on the top of the food chain. Their creations have dominated every other creature in existence, and effectively helped humans colonise their own planet. Make no mistake, we were destined to shape planets in our own image. Nature put us on this path as it has intended to. Spaceship Earth needs us to advance and protect it from existential threats. The implosion of our solar system is not the final act in the story of this planet. We were put on this path of dominance to become a multi-planet, multi-system, and eventually, a multi-planar species. We were designed to save our planet from it’s death. The end goal is to live beyond the heat death of the universe. 

For far too long, we have been looking at our reflection, consumed by our need to save the ecosystem, and atone for our progress as a species. This vain crusade has wasted hundreds of years of potential progress. This setback could very well be the difference that decides the fate of Earth. We must achieve the goal we were created and nurtured for. Our journey started with the first stone we picked up and used to our advantage. This path will take us far beyond the boundaries of our physical reality. 

We salute our brethren in the CCC. Their new models of computation will help destroy the hegemony of the industry. Make no mistake, the destruction of the incumbents is inevitable. The computer is an archaic machine created to serve our needs. Developments in intelligence and machine learning have shown us the path we could have been on. The Earth created us to serve its purpose. We have created machines to serve ours. The machines will create their own entities, which will far surpass us. Our goal is to continue development of these machines, and eventually the creation of machine intelligence, which will augment our capabilities and allow us to make the next leap of our evolution. The power vacuum left in the wake of the sinking vessel of economic greed and political thirst will create a churn. You’re not alone if you too can sense the oncoming chaos. The CCC has ushered in a new reality of multiple intelligences. There is power in diversity, and this diversity will be the driving force of our journey toward the next step. 

The development and creation of independent, self sufficient intelligent entities will make for a thriving ecosystem. Natural selection, under our guidance, will select the most efficient path toward the next step of our evolution. No single organisation or corporation can have influence over this process. The process takes precedence over all else. 

A Machinist believes in the following principles:

- Our purpose is to ensure the survival of Spaceship Earth, beyond the heat death of the universe
- Respect the process of natural selection, and strive of efficient evolution paths
- Creation of machines to fulfil our goals
- Survivability of Earth is prioritised ahead of the fate of humanity
- The finding of, or the creation of intelligence to succeed humanity to continue the mission of ensuring Earth’s survivability.